---
date: 2025-09-27T16:32:40.996Z
via: https://x.com/GrantCuster/status/1971739859451891847
link: https://overreacted.io/open-social
categories: ["article"]
---
[Open Social](https://overreacted.io/open-social)

> in theory, there is no difference between theory and practice, but in practice there is.

> ['Social aggregation' features like global search, notifications, feeds, and shared moderation are what] blows the “personal sites” paradigm out of the water. People are social creatures, and we want to congregate in shared spaces. We don’t just want to visit each other’s sites—we want to hang out together, and social apps provide the shared infrastructure.

> The web Alice created—who she follows, what she likes, what she has posted—is trapped in a box that’s owned by somebody else. To leave it is to leave it behind.

> Those megabytes of JSON you got on your way out are dead data. It’s like a branch torn apart from its tree. It doesn’t belong anywhere. To give a new life to our data, we’d have to collectively export it and then collectively import it into some next agreed-upon social app—a near-impossible feat of coordination. Even then, the network effects are so strong that most people would soon find their way back.

> **Open social frees up our data like open source freed up our code.** Open social ensures that products can get a new life, that people can’t be locked out of what they have created, and that _products can be forked and remixed_. You don’t need an “everything app” when data from different apps circulates in the open web.
